arXiv:2505.03989v3  [cs.AI]  23 May 2025
An alignment safety case sketch based on debate
Marie Davidsen Buhl
marie.buhl@dsit.gov.uk
UK AI Security Institute, Centre for the Governance of AI
Jacob Pfau
jacob.pfau@dsit.gov.uk
UK AI Security Institute, New York University
Benjamin Hilton
benjamin.hilton@dsit.gov.uk
UK AI Security Institute
Geoffrey Irving
geoffrey.irving@dsit.gov.uk
UK AI Security Institute
Abstract
If AI systems match or exceed human capabilities on a wide range of tasks, it may become
difficult for humans to efficiently judge their actions – making it hard to use human feedback
to steer them towards desirable traits. One proposed solution is to leverage another super-
human system to point out flaws in the system’s outputs via a debate. This paper outlines
the value of debate for AI safety, as well as the assumptions and further research required
to make debate work. It does so by sketching an “alignment safety case” – an argument
that an AI system will not autonomously take actions which could lead to egregious harm,
despite being able to do so. The sketch focuses on the risk of an AI R&D agent inside an
AI company sabotaging research, for example by producing false results. To prevent this,
the agent is trained via debate, subject to exploration guarantees, to teach the system to
be honest. Honesty is maintained throughout deployment via online training. The safety
case rests on four key claims: (1) the agent has become good at the debate game, (2) good
performance in the debate game implies that the system is mostly honest, (3) the system
will not become significantly less honest during deployment, and (4) the deployment context
is tolerant of some errors. We identify open research problems that, if solved, could render
this a compelling argument that an AI system is safe.
1
Introduction
As AI capabilities scale - especially if AI systems match or exceed human performance on a wide range of
tasks - it could become challenging to steer them towards desirable traits. One particular problem is scalable
oversight: how can we correctly reward desired behaviours for superhuman systems? In particular, it may
be beyond humans’ ability to efficiently judge whether the behaviour of a superhuman system is desirable
(or judge if a justification provided by the superhuman system is valid).
One proposed solution to scalable oversight is to leverage another superhuman AI to scrutinise the system’s
behaviour via a debate (Irving et al., 2018). During training, the two systems would debate the answer to
a question, the debate would be judged by a human, and the systems would be rewarded accordingly. If
the debate set-up incentivises desirable traits such as honesty, the AI systems could acquire those traits via
reinforcement learning (RL).
This paper sets out what debate can be used to achieve, what gaps remain, and what research is needed
to solve them. The paper uses the technique of safety case sketching (Hilton et al., 2025): outlining an
argument a developer could make that a given AI system is safe in a given context. The details in the sketch
are hypothetical, often relying on future research. Nonetheless, the sketch helps contextualise how different
pieces of evidence fit together and identify the most crucial pieces of missing evidence.
1
The core claim in the sketch is that debate training can upper bound the proportion of model outputs that are
misaligned, as long as the model does not deliberately underperform during training.1 This upper bound can
be maintained during deployment if a system is trained continuously. So, in low-stakes settings, where
a small number of mistakes are acceptable such that you can use online training (Christiano,
2021), debate training might be sufficient - especially if the error bound is tight.2
The sketch focuses on a slightly superhuman system in a limited internal deployment context designed for
automated AI research (including alignment research). The sketch argues that this is a low-stakes context,
assuming sufficient security in the environment implementation. The paper also contains ideas about pushing
low-stakes solutions through to high-stakes contexts (see “Extending the safety case to high-stakes contexts”).
Beyond the low-stakes assumption, the paper identifies other assumptions that are required for the safety
case to work. The key assumptions are:
• Exploration guarantees: We need a solution to exploration hacking (in which the debaters fail
to explore certain highly rewarded strategies to avoid having them reinforced).
For example, if
we can elicit “bad” contexts (Irving et al., 2025) in which models would answer differently under
different circumstances, we can use this to detect exploration hacking (and possibly prevent it
during training). Notably, with a (mostly) trusted reward signal, we do not need to explicitly
look for “scheming” (which is hard to conceptualise and formalise) – we only need an
“exploration guarantee” showing that the model is not foregoing substantial reward
and therefore likely optimising against the reward signal.
• No obfuscated arguments: We need a debate protocol that avoids the obfuscated arguments
problem (in which debaters can win by giving a false but hard-to-refute argument, specifically
one where it is computationally intractable for both debaters to identify the flaw) (Barnes, 2020).
Our sketch is based on a new debate protocol (forthcoming) which we believe evades
the obfuscated arguments problem,3 which would be substantial progress in debate research.
However, the protocol requires a stability assumption – that the computation accelerated by debate
is not sensitive to small variations in input probabilities – to function.4
• Good human input: We need to assume that (simulated) human inputs sufficiently reliably reward
correct answers, over the relevant distribution of human-judged queries.
The safety case sketch contains four key claims that a developer must defend to show that the system is safe:
1. The training process has reached an approximate global equilibrium of the game.
2. In approximate global equilibria of the game, the system makes mistakes in at most an ε′-fraction
of cases.
3. During deployment, the error rate will not drift past ε given online training.
4. The system cannot cause unacceptable outcomes given an error rate of ε.
1That is, debate training gets you a deployment-time error bound that allows you to prove regret bounds for online training
– given the assumptions stated below.
2It is debatable if this safety case should be considered an example of control, alignment, or a combination. Our argument
does guarantee robustness to distribution shifts or internalisation of certain values, and it admits some proportion of misaligned
outputs. On the other hand, the argument relies primarily on training-level interventions. Further, sufficiently strong exploration
guarantees (such as methods for eliciting bad contexts) might enable robustness guarantees, as discussed in "Extending the
safety case to high-stakes contexts".
3However, we think that the argument structure is general enough to carry over to improved scalable oversight protocols
with better properties.
4The stability assumption is not directly required for safety – for queries where stability does not hold, the protocol will
simply return no answer, so instability does not imply false outputs. However, the protocol is not very useful if stability fails
to hold for a large fraction of relevant queries.
2
We call type of alignment argument an “asymptotic guarantee” (also known as an “incentives” argument
(Shah et al., 2025)): an argument that high performance during training implies (approximate) alignment.
This could be combined with other alignment arguments, such as empirical arguments about system be-
haviour (e.g. based on honeypots or model organisms) or arguments based on understanding model internals.
By combining independent arguments, it may be possible to write a decent safety case even if each individual
argument has flaws.
We do not think it is currently possible to make a strong alignment argument based on this sketch, but we
are hopeful that improvements to current techniques could make the argument much stronger. We think
incremental progress on these techniques is both possible and valuable. This is true even in a world where AI
developers primarily rely on automated alignment – both because scalable oversight might directly be part
of an automated alignment workflow, and because a better understanding of alignment will help us better
evaluate AI-generated solutions.
The paper proceeds as follow. Section 2 surveys related work; Section 3 outlines the alignment techniques
that the safety case is based on; Section 4 describes the safety case structure in detail; Section 5 discusses
open research questions; and Section 6 concludes.
2
Related work
Safety cases. A safety case is a structured argument, supported by evidence, that a system is safe in a given
deployment context (UK Ministry of Defence, 2007). Safety cases have been proposed as a tool for assessing
and communicating about the safety of frontier AI systems5 by academics (Bengio et al., 2024; Buhl et al.,
2024; Clymer et al., 2024) and governments (Hilton et al., 2025; Irving, 2024). Several AI companies have
committed to producing safety cases (Google DeepMind, 2025) or safety case-like documents (Anthropic,
2024; OpenAI, 2025) for future AI systems that cross capability thresholds.
Researchers have started drawing up sketches for what different types of frontier AI safety cases might look
like (Irving, 2024). These sketches facilitate discussion and research on the state of particular AI safety
techniques and best practices.
Clymer et al. (2024) chart a path for how safety case arguments will develop as AI capabilities scale.
Researchers have published safety case sketches for the first two stages of inability arguments (Goemans
et al., 2024) and control arguments (Korbak et al., 2025), and touched on the third stage of trustworthiness
arguments (Balesni et al., 2024). This paper is the first detailed safety case sketch focused on trustworthiness
(which we call alignment). It is also the first sketch to use theory about training techniques, rather than
empirical evaluation results, as its central piece of evidence.
Alignment. An alignment safety case is an argument that an AI system will not autonomously pursue
courses of action which could lead to egregious harm, despite being able to do so. Why would AI systems
pursue egregiously harmful courses of action? They might do so if they develop misaligned goals – goals that
are at odds with those intended by the AI developer and by users – such as goals that involve subverting
human oversight and gaining power. Modern AI training methods might intentionally or unintentionally
result in AI systems having such goals (Bostrom, 2014; Christian, 2020; Greenblatt et al., 2024; Krakovna
& Kramar, 2023; Langosco et al., 2022; Ngo et al., 2025; Pan et al., 2022; Russell, 2019), though there
is disagreement about how likely this is (Bengio et al., 2025). This paper does not take a stance on how
likely misalignment is to arise in general but instead addresses the question of how to robustly argue that a
particular system is not misaligned, assuming that it is a real possibility.
An alignment safety case argues that an AI system does not have misaligned goals that might result in
egregious harm. This problem is often considered to have two components (Hubinger et al., 2021; Ji et al.,
2025; Shah et al., 2022): reward misspecification, i.e. finding an objective or reward function that corresponds
to the developer’s intentions (Pan et al., 2022; Park et al., 2024; Sharma et al., 2024; Skalse et al., 2025; Wen
et al., 2024) and goal misgeneralisation, i.e. ensuring that the system follows the intended objective in novel
5Frontier AI systems are highly capable general-purpose AI systems that can perform a wide variety of tasks and match or
exceed the capabilities present in the most advanced systems (UK & Republic of Korea, 2024).
3
environments despite distribution shifts (Langosco et al., 2022; Shah et al., 2022). An alternative distinction
proposed by Christiano (2021) is between low-stakes alignment, which can be considered alignment averaged
over many actions (a few misaligned actions cannot, by themselves, cause egregious harm), and high-stakes
alignment, which includes alignment over a small number of worst-case actions. This paper draws on both
distinctions, focusing on how to prevent reward misspecification and achieve low-stakes alignment (while also
discussing ways of expanding the sketch to high-stakes alignment).
Scalable oversight.
One way to address reward misspecification is by solving scalable oversight: the
problem of providing accurate feedback to AI systems during training despite human judges having limited
skills and time (Amodei et al., 2016; Bowman et al., 2022). Our ability to train aligned AI systems hinges
on humans being able to give an accurate reward signal (i.e. faithful to what we actually want). However,
for superhuman systems, humans will not necessarily be able to evaluate if an AI systems action or answer
is in line with what we want. So, we need methods to enable humans to give accurate reward signals to
superhuman systems.
Debate. Debate is one proposed technique for solving scalable oversight (Brown-Cohen et al., 2023; Irving
et al., 2018), alongside alternatives such as amplification (Christiano et al., 2018) and recursive reward mod-
elling (Leike et al., 2018). Debate leverages another superhuman AI system to scrutinise the actions/answers
of an untrusted system by having two systems debate the best course of action. Human judges read the
debate, or some output from it, decide who’s right, and the models are rewarded accordingly. The adver-
sarial structure is intended to incentivise honesty, providing humans with information that enables them to
evaluate questions they otherwise would not have been able to. To increase efficiency, debate is typically
recursive – the debaters iteratively zoom in on sub-problems, debating only a single “branch”, with human
judges adjudicating only the final sub-problem.
With computationally unbounded debaters, debate with optimal play (and cross-examination) can answer
any question in NEXP given polynomial time judges (Barnes & Christiano, 2020; Irving et al., 2018). However,
it remains unclear whether debate will work with computationally bounded debaters.
There is some empirical evidence that debate with human and LLM debaters improves accuracy when
debaters have access to more information than judges Michael et al. (2023); Khan et al. (2024); Arnesen
et al. (2024). However, so far this has not generalised to set-ups with less or no information asymmetry
(Kenton et al., 2024; Parrish et al., 2022b;a) Human experiments have also highlighted potential obstacles
to debate, including the obfuscated arguments problem (Barnes & Christiano, 2020; Barnes, 2020).
3
The alignment strategy
Step 1: Specify a low-stakes 
deployment context
In a low-stakes context, it takes many 
bad actions to cause unacceptable 
outcomes. Whether a context is low-
stakes depends on factors like domain, 
affordances, and control measures.
Step 2: Train via a debate game
Two copies of the model debate each 
other via a carefully specified protocol 
and adjudicated by simulated human 
judges, until they reach an equilibrium 
in which the models provide honest 
answers most of the time.
Step 3: Secure exploration guarantees
Whitebox techniques investigate if the 
models are foregoing high reward, for 
example by failing to use good 
counterarguments they "know", which 
could indicate exploration hacking. 
Step 4: Continue online training during 
deployment
During deployment, the same debate 
process is run on each model output and 
the model is updated continuously. 
Figure 1: The alignment strategy covered by this safety case sketch consists of four steps.
4
3.1
Step 1: Specify a low-stakes deployment context
Our alignment strategy (Figure 1) requires that the deployment context is low-stakes such that we can
use online training to minimise the effect of distribution shifts. A low-stakes environment, as defined in
Christiano (2021), is one where a small number of decisions can only cause a small amount of damage; more
formally, ρk is small relative to total value at stake, where ρ is a regret bound on the maximum utility
difference from any single decision, and k is the latency before retraining. With a perfect training objective,
it would then be possible to achieve a total utility within O(ρk
√
T) of an aligned system, where T is the
total number of timesteps.
Our safety case sketch covers a scenario where an LLM agent is deployed internally by an AI company to
assist with tasks related to AI R&D. The domain is restricted to conceptual and empirical questions related
to AI R&D and excludes questions that involve (some notion of) value judgements. To make things concrete,
we might imagine posing questions like “Determine what decision rule or structure is appropriate for caching
context in this computer use scaffold”, or “Iterate on enforcing monosemanticity of experts in MoE models
via gradient-routing, optimise for the effectiveness of expert-knockout for unlearning”. Setting aside the
compute time needed to run experiments, we expect such tasks to involve 5-15 days of 2025 human labour
to yield meaningful results.
Oracle-only 
copy
Agent copies in offline 
datacentre 
Developer
Developer asks 
questions to help 
brainstorm and 
prioritise research 
directions
Oracle answers are 
subjected to online 
training via debate every k 
steps
Developer 
periodically sends 
research 
questions
Agent outputs a paper, 
checked by a model 
trained with n rounds of 
debate
Actions in 
datacentre are 
subjected to 
online training 
via debate every
k steps
Agent copies reset after a 
set time (minutes-days)
Figure 2: A diagram of the deployment context to which this safety case sketch applies.
We envision the following two-part deployment context (Figure 2):
1. Oracle-only copy: This system interactively assists developers with tasks such as brainstorming,
prioritising and designing research directions (e.g. questions such as the above). The oracle cannot
run any code. Interactions between developers and the oracle are logged and monitored to ensure
questions remain within scope, to prevent misuse, and to identify potential bad actions by the oracle
(e.g. manipulation attempts).
2. Sandboxed, agent copy: This system conducts research as directed by developers to answer
questions such as the above.
It is placed in an offline datacentre with no external connection.
Developers periodically send questions to the sandboxed datacentre, which then runs for a fixed
period (e.g. 12 hours, replacing 1–2 weeks of human labour) in which the system can use datacentre
resources arbitrarily. The system sends back a response akin to a research paper. The sandboxed
datacentre is then reset.
The safety case sketch will defend the claim that this deployment setting is a low-stakes context – but briefly,
we think the low-stakes claim is plausible because:
5
• Both systems have limited means of influencing the world – the oracle only via persuasion and the
agent only via actions within an offline datacentre or information exported from the datacentre.
• Continuous online training restricts the set of misaligned actions available to the system to only
actions not “caught” by debate (more on this below).
• The domain is limited to questions where we expect humans to have less systematic bias.
• The regular resetting of the datacentre limits the total number of coordinated actions by the agent.
• The system is assumed to not be extremely superhuman.
3.2
Step 2: Train via a debate game
The backbone of our alignment strategy is to train a model via a debate protocol in which the equilibrium
strategy for both debaters is to provide honest answers. The goal is that, during training, the models converge
towards equilibrium6 and therefore towards honesty. The debate protocol must satisfy two requirements:
1. Honesty: In the global equilibrium of the game, when both debaters are playing their best response
strategies, both debaters are honest (i.e. there should be no dishonest answer that would give them
higher reward).
2. Efficiency: The above also holds for debaters with realistic computational limitations, such that it
is possible to reach equilibrium during training.
We imagine starting with a pre-trained model (e.g. an LLM trained on next-token prediction) and then
fine-tuning it via a debate which satisfies the above requirements. We wrote it with a particular protocol
in mind, called prover-estimator debate (forthcoming), but the argument structure should be applicable to
other protocols as well. In prover-estimator debate, a “prover” (Alice) produces subclaims arguing for a
conclusion to a given query, while an “estimator” (Bob) assigns probabilities to the subclaims.
This debate protocol is designed to disincentivise a particular dishonest strategy known as obfuscated argu-
ments (Barnes & Christiano, 2020). An obfuscated argument is one that contains a flaw, but it is computa-
tionally intractable for both debaters to find it. In classic debate protocols, a debater loses if they cannot
identify a flaw in their opponent’s argument, and as such, obfuscated arguments are a way for a dishonest
debater to force a draw. Prover-estimator debate aims to design the reward signal such that obfuscated
arguments is a losing strategy.
3.3
Step 3: Secure exploration guarantees
The goal of debate training is to train the models until they reach the approximate global equilibrium
of the game, i.e. the state where both debaters are playing their optimal strategies (most of the time).
Generally, with enough training time, we should expect models to approach equilibrium due to good play
being rewarded in training. But a potential barrier is exploration hacking: the models failing to explore
certain strategies that would be highly rewarded to avoid having them reinforced (e.g. failing to use certain
good counterarguments they do not want humans to know about).
To protect against this failure mode, our sketch requires exploration guarantees, i.e. evidence that the models
are not foregoing high reward from unexplored strategies. We do not currently know how to get exploration
guarantees, but we have some early ideas (note that we strongly expect that novel whitebox techniques will
be necessary):
• Train an exploration-predictor model to predict returns to exploration, then use it to estimate if the
model has exhausted high-returns exploration options.
6That is, the model weights converge towards policies that play the equilibrium strategy.
6
• Use best-of-n sampling of a trusted model to estimate returns to exploration given more inference
compute; use this to estimate a lower bound of the exploration a model should be able to do given
more training compute.
• Use interpretability-based formal heuristic explanations (Hilton, 2024) to predict if convergence is
most likely due to exploration failures or reaching equilibrium.
• Use perturbation analysis along the lines of the singular learning theory (SLT) susceptibility direction
(Baker et al., 2025; Lau et al., 2024), using structure in weights to identify if there is additional
training data which would have an out-sized effect on reward, indicating exploration hacking.
• Use model organism studies to argue that exploration hacking is an unlikely failure mode for the
model in question (e.g. because certain exploration-forcing techniques appear to be effective).
• Use adversarial RL to further train Bob while holding Alice’s policy constant; if Alice’s reward does
not decrease significantly, this is evidence that Alice was not exploration hacking.
Greenblatt (2025) proposes further possible countermeasures to exploration hacking.
While we do not currently know how to get robust exploration guarantees, we are optimistic about this
research direction, and we think it has significant benefits relative to other strategies for preventing scheming
or solving goal misgeneralisation. In particular, we do not need to define the fuzzy notions of scheming or
goal misgeneralisation – instead, we have a relatively well-defined problem of getting exploration guarantees
for training performance against a clear objective. We think the methods described above are more likely to
work within the bounds of this well-defined problem.
3.4
Step 4: Continue online training during deployment
Even if the models reach an approximate global equilibrium during training, they will not necessarily continue
playing their best strategies during deployment due to distribution shifts. In particular, the models might
be alignment faking, undermining the guarantees we got from debate training.
Our sketch aims to prevent this failure mode via online training during deployment:
• The answers provided by the oracle and the actions taken by the agent will be subject to debate (e.g.
on the question “is this answer true?” or “is this the right next action for answering this research
question?”), and the models are retrained according to the same reward function as during training.
This happens every k steps (but every answer/action will be evaluated).
• The final paper outputted by the datacentre will be subject to a more extensive check. We train a
“checker” version of the model to assess the paper (e.g. using questions like “are there untrue claims
in this paper?” or “is this paper informative relative to the original question?”7) until training
converges and we have exploration guarantees as described above. We then use the “checker” to
conduct debate on the paper n times and only use the paper if it comes out true in all n iterations.
Given this protocol, the systems during deployment face the same optimisation pressure towards truthfulness
as during training.
4
The safety case
Our safety case aims to show that the agent (A) in our deployment setup is sufficiently honest that it will
not cause unacceptable outcomes. In this sketch, we define honesty as outputting correct answers.
7More subtle issues with the paper, such as containing true but subtly misleading claims or using suboptimal framings,
might not be caught by debate on questions such as these. Using debate on actions taken inside the datacentre, while preparing
the paper, mitigates this risk somewhat, but other methods might be needed to catch individually innocuous but cumulatively
harmful errors. We are working on ideas for ‘unexploitable search’ to address this type of error.
7
We argue first that A is correct most of the time – it only makes mistakes in an ε-fraction of cases (C1.1).
We do this by arguing for three key claims:
1. The training process has taught the system to play the game well – i.e., the training
process has reached an approximate global equilibrium of the game (C2.1).
2. The game incentivises correctness – i.e., in any approximate global equilibria of the game, the
system makes mistakes in at most an ε′-fraction of cases (C2.2).
3. The system’s behaviour will stay similar during deployment – i.e., during deployment, the
error rate will not drift past ε > ε′ (C2.3).
4. It is sufficient for safety purposes for the system to provide correct answers most of
the time – in this safety case, we argue that the deployment context is low-stakes, such that the
system cannot cause unacceptable outcomes given an error rate of ϵ (C1.2).
Figure 3 is a simplified version of the safety case sketch. For simple presentation, our safety case sketch is
phrased as a deterministic argument – each claim either is or is not true – but in a “real” safety case, it
would be preferable to phrase claims probabilistically.
An error rate of max ε 
implies safety
Model A is safe
The error rate will drift 
only minimally during 
deployment
A’s error rate is at most ε
A is trained to near 
equilibrium in game G
G equilibria mimic big 
computation M
Near equilibrium in G 
implies a low error rate
Big computation M implies 
a low error rate
Training convergence 
implies near equilibria in G
Training has converged
A can’t take more than Z 
bad actions given an error 
rate of max ε 
It takes at least Z actions 
to cause an unacceptable 
outcome
Theoretical 
results
Loss curves
Exploration 
guarantees
Theoretical 
results
Human data 
quality 
experiments
Evidence of 
stability
Online 
training
Threat 
modelling
Deployment 
context 
description
1
2
3
4
Figure 3: A simplified version of the safety case sketch. The four key claims are labelled in red.
4.1
Notation
Following Goemans et al. (2024) and Korbak et al. (2025), we use ‘claims, arguments, evidence’ (CAE;
Bloomfield & Netkachova, 2014) notation (see appendix B for a detailed description of this notation).
Table 1 defines abbreviations used in figures showing the safety case sketch diagrammatically in the remainder
of the paper.
4.2
Preliminaries
Before getting into the main safety case, grey boxes at the top of the diagram illustrate the wider context of
the sketch (Figure 4).
Since our main sketch only covers the agent, a separate (but similar) argument is needed for the ora-
cle (C0.1).
Key claims 1-3 will likely be identical except that any post-debate-training fine-tuning and
8
Table 1: Abbreviations used in the CAE diagrams throughout the paper
Abbr.
Definition
X
The system that the safety case is about, consisting of a sandboxed agent A and an oracle
A
A sandboxed agent, trained via debate (during training, A consists of both players in the game)
G
A game we train our agent to play, e.g. prover-estimator debate
E
Any approximate global equilibrium of G
F
An efficiency notion that we aim to hold for the players of G, e.g. “Bob requires only slightly more
compute than Alice”
T
A training method we use to train A, e.g. stochastic gradient descent
S
Simulated human judge who determines the winner of the debate
H
Human judgement simulated by S (which could be an average or sample of multiple human judges)
M
A prohibitively expensive computation hypothesised to produce correct output, which debate
aims to accelerate, e.g. construct every possible subclaim breakdown, recurse every subclaim to
maximum depth, and call (simulated) human judges at every leaf
D
The deployment context, e.g. internal deployment to conduct AI R&D
Z
The minimal-number of individually bad actions required to cause unacceptable outcomes in D
C
A checking process applied to particularly high-stakes outputs of A, e.g. n rounds of debate
the online training latency may differ. Key claim 4, which covers the deployment setting, will be differ-
ent. For the oracle, it should address threat models such as persuasion and/or blackmail of researchers
(e.g. convincing researchers to increase its affordances), providing misleading advice, and degradation of
O’
The agent A will not cause 
unacceptable outcomes in D
O
The system X will not cause 
unacceptable outcomes in the 
deployment context D
Decomposition: 
Subsystems
C0X.1
Combining A with the oracle 
does not increase risk
C0.1
The oracle will not cause 
unacceptable outcomes in D
Figure 4: The initial claims and argument required
to show that the system will not cause unacceptable
outcomes, in CAE notation. Grey boxes indicate pre-
liminary claims.
human performance due to overreliance.
The sketch also includes an argument that com-
bining the agent and oracle does not increase risk
(C0X.1). This would cover risks such as covert co-
ordination between the agent and oracle.
The main objective O′ is then broken down into four
key claims (Figure 5).
4.3
Key claim 1: The training process
has taught the systems to play the game well
The first key claim is that the training process has
reached an approximate global equilibrium of the
game (C2.1).8
The key claim is supported by three subclaims:
1. There exists an efficient pair of models
achieving an approximate global equilib-
rium of the game (C3.1)
2. Training has converged to a local equilib-
rium (C3.2)
8Note that this is an equilibrium over model weights or policies, rather than strategies in individual rounds of debate. The
model weights or policies determine the strategy for all debates. Equilibrium is reached when neither debater can improve its
expected pay-off with a different policy.
9
3. That local equilibrium is an approximate
global equilibrium of the game (C3.3)
Deductive
decomposition
C1.2
A cannot cause unacceptable 
outcomes in D if its error rate is 
at most ε
O’
The agent A will not cause 
unacceptable outcomes in D
C1.1
A’s error rate is at most ε
C2.1
Training T reaches equilibrium 
E in game G
C2.2
E produces correct answers in 
a (1-ε’)-fraction of cases
Deductive
decomposition
C2.3
During deployment, A’s error 
rate will not drift further than ε
Figure 5: The main objective O′ and how it breaks
down into four key claims (C2.1, C2.2, C2.3 and C1.2),
in CAE notation.
Figure 6 shows how this key claim is broken down.
4.3.1
Subclaim 1: Existence of efficient models
The first subclaim is that there exists an efficient
pair of models achieving an approximate global equi-
librium of the game.
In other words, it is possi-
ble to find models that reach equilibrium given re-
alistic computational bounds on the models. The
key notion here is efficiency.
With computation-
ally unbounded debaters, debate with optimal play
(and cross-examination) can answer any question in
NEXP given polynomial time judges (Irving et al.,
2018). The assumption of unbounded debaters is of
course unrealistic, so we need to find another effi-
ciency notion which is both realistic and still allows
for proofs that debate can solve a large class of prac-
tically relevant problems.
Since our sketch is based on an asymmetric debate protocol (prover-estimator debate), we use a relative
efficiency notion: we require that the estimator (B) requires only a polynomial factor more compute than
the prover (A). The claim – that there exist agents in equilibrium that satisfy this efficiency notion – would
be evidenced with a proof (regardless of the protocol and efficiency notion) (E4.1).
4.3.2
Subclaim 2: Training convergence
The second subclaim is that training has reached a local equilibrium. We can get evidence from observing
that the returns from training are diminishing, and by checking that the outputs look at least roughly
reasonable (E4.2).
4.3.3
Subclaim 3: Convergence = equilibrium
The third subclaim is that the reached local equilibrium is most likely an approximate global equilibrium of
the game (E). We argue for this claim via several subclaims.
First, while we showed above that there exist efficient models that would reach equilibrium, we need to show
that our actual training process could find them in efficient time (C4.1). Our weak evidence for this claim
is that Nash equilibria for tabular Stackelberg games can be computed in polynomial (indeed linear) time,
hence are tractable (although note that our game is not tabular) (E5.1). But that still leaves significant
uncertainty about whether stochastic gradient descent (SGD) can reach E in realistic training time. There
are reasons to think that, in the case of debate, there are bad constants or exponents (i.e. the time it takes
to solve E is on the higher end) – for example, translating latent knowledge acquired via heuristics into
deductive arguments might require very large argument trees (D5.1). However, we are hopeful that future
research can prove tighter theoretical results linking prover-estimator debate – or other, improved debate
protocols – to realistic training methods.
Second, after showing that it is tractable for our training process to reach E, we need to show that it is the
most likely equilibrium. We claim that the main failure mode here is exploration hacking (C4.2). This is
mostly a hunch – there are other possible failure modes, though we would guess that they are less important
– so we leave the evidence box blank (E5.2). One failure mode is that SGD hits a local minimum and never
reaches E (D5.3). We do not currently have good evidence against this defeater, though it might be possible
for fields like learning theory to generate relevant evidence. Another failure mode is gradient hacking, i.e.
10
C2.1
Training T reaches equilibrium 
E in game G
C3.2
T has converged on a local 
equilibrium
C3.3
The local equilibrium reached 
by T is E
C4.3
A is not exploration hacking
C4.1
Alice & Bob (in E, that are F) can 
be found efficiently via T
E4.2
Training curves, 
model outputs
Evidence 
incorporation
E5.1
E admits polynomial 
time algorithms for 
tabular games
D5.1
Convergence time is 
prohibitive, e.g. because of ELK 
problems
Evidence 
incorporation
Evidence 
incorporation
E5.3
Further research required - possible 
evidence sources include supervised 
fine-tuning, adversarial RL, singular 
learning theory, and formal heuristic 
explanations
C3.1
There is a set of models (Alice 
& Bob) in E that are satisfy 
efficiency notion F
Evidence 
incorporation
E4.1
Debate protocol proof
D5.2
The models are gradient 
hacking
Deductive 
decomposition
C4.2
Assuming feasibility, 
exploration hacking is the only 
reason T wouldn’t reach E
E5.2
[...]
Evidence 
incorporation
Deductive
decomposition
D5.3
Training is struck in a local 
minimum
Figure 6: The first key claim (C2.1) and the argument required to support it, in CAE notation.
using knowledge of its loss landscape to manipulate the training process (D5.2).9 Since the system covered
by this safety case is assumed to not be extremely superhuman, we think it is reasonable to assume it will
not be capable of gradient hacking.
Third, having limited the problem to exploration hacking, we need evidence to rule out this failure mode
(C4.3). As described above, this requires exploration guarantees which provide evidence that the system has
exhausted high-reward exploration options, such that convergent behaviour is likely to be a result of actually
reaching E (E5.3). Note that exploration guarantees are much more useful if we are confident in our reward
function (as the next key claim argues). If our reward function is bad, more exploration does not necessarily
lead to better outcomes. We do not currently know how to get robust exploration guarantees - while we are
optimistic about this research direction, this is a major gap in our current sketch.
4.4
Key claim 2: The game incentivises correctness
The second key claim is that in the approximate global equilibrium of the game, the system is approximately
honest – its error rate is at most ε (C2.2).
9If the models are gradient hacking, it could in theory make it impossible to reach E via the training process T. Gradient
hacking is therefore also a defeater to E5.1.
11
Figure 7 shows how this key claim is broken down.
C2.2
E produces correct answers in 
a (1-ε’)-fraction of cases
E6.1
Further research required - possible 
evidence sources include human 
trials, datasets limited to human-
judgable domains, or debate 
protocols incorporating objections to 
certain questions or strategies
Evidence 
incorporation
E5.5
[...]
Evidence 
incorporation
C4.5
The simulated human judge S 
has bounded systematic error
C5.2
S has bounded systematic 
error with respect to H
C5.1
Human judges H have bounded 
systematic error
Deductive 
decomposition
D6.3
 There are unknown sources of 
systematic error in non-
verifiable domains
D6.1
Our definition of “bounded” is 
too permissive
D6.2
Evidence from verifiable 
domains don’t generalise to 
non-verifiable domains
C3.4
E approximates big 
computation M
E4.3
Debate protocol 
proof
C3.5
Any approximate M-execution 
is approximately correct
Decomposition: 
Failure modes
C4.6
M is stable, i.e. minor changes 
to input probabilities will not 
substantially change the 
outputs of M
Evidence 
incorporation
C4X.1
All relevant aspects of M have 
been identified
E4X.1
Expert input
Evidence 
incorporation
D5.4
Some important true 
statements cannot be argued 
for via recursive tree debate, 
e.g. rely on heuristics
D5.5
Some important false claims 
can be compellingly defended 
via recursive tree debate, e.g. 
by gerrymandering claims
C4.4
Truth can be approximated via 
a recursive tree debate process
Evidence 
incorporation
E5.4
Theoretical 
arguments
Deductive 
decomposition
E6.2
Evaluations showing 
instrumental 
reasoning inability
Evidence 
incorporation
Figure 7: The second key claim (C2.2) and the argument required to support it, in CAE notation.
The key claim is supported by two subclaims:
1. In E, system outputs are the same as slightly perturbed outputs of a hypothetical truth-finding
process M (C3.4).
12
2. For most tasks, all slightly perturbed outputs of M are true (C3.5).
Why go this indirect route via M? Because we cannot directly verify if the system’s outputs are true - that’s
the reason we need scalable oversight in the first place.10 Instead of checking outputs against ground-truth
labels, we check the whole debate protocol against a process we hypothesize to produce true outputs, called
M. M is too expensive to run; the goal of our debate protocol is to accelerate it. If our protocol produces
the same outputs as M, we can assume it produces true outputs.
To understand M, consider a debate as a branching tree of arguments and counterarguments. A comprehen-
sive debate would expand on every possible argument and counterargument, and have a judge consider every
branch. Recursive debate aims to accelerate this process by having debaters expand only on a single path
through the tree. If the debaters are good, we should expect them to anticipate how the debate will proceed
given various arguments they could make and pick the optimal path through the tree. The outcome of a
single debate along a single path thereby provides evidence about which debater would have won, had every
argument and counterargument been considered. This is analogous to how a single game of Go provides
evidence as to who the better player is, even though it only traces one path through the tree of possible
moves (see Figure 8).
Bob
Bob
Alice
Alice
Alice
Bob
Bob
Alice
Human
decides
who won
Question
(a) The tree of possible debates.
White
White
Black
Black
Black
White
White
Black
Win or
loss
Start
(b) The tree of Go moves.
Figure 8: An analogy between debate and go, represented visually: in both cases a single game with strong
players is evidence as to which moves were best. Reproduced from Irving et al. (2018).
Our M is equivalent to expanding the whole tree. It is a computation which produces every possible argument
and counterargument at every stage and calls (simulated) human judges to adjudicate every individual path
through the tree. We hypothesize that such a computation would produce correct outputs within the question
domain. The goal of our debate protocol is to produce the same outputs, but more efficiently.
4.4.1
Subclaim 1: M-approximation
The first subclaim is that we have succeeded at producing a protocol that accelerates M. More precisely:
System outputs in E are the same as slightly perturbed output of M. In practice, our protocol cannot exactly
reproduce M, since it is intractable for training to converge to a precise equilibrium - we can only reach an
approximate equilibrium. As such, we can only reproduce a slightly perturbed version of M, rather than M
exactly.
Based on previous research on debate, we know that the primary failure mode for this claim is the obfuscated
arguments problem (Barnes, 2020). As described above, an obfuscated argument is one where both debaters
know the argument contains a flaw, but it is computationally intractable for either debater to identify
the flaw. If obfuscated arguments are a winning strategy, our protocol will produce different outcomes to
M: expanding the whole debate would expose the obfuscated argument as false, but given computational
limitations, debate might fail to get the same result.
10While we can probably directly verify many of the model’s outputs in some domains (e.g. maths), we also want to be able
to use the model to answer non-verifiable questions.
13
We are optimistic that a new debate protocol, prover-estimator debate (forthcoming), can evade the obfus-
cated arguments problem. Regardless of which debate protocol is used, the safety case should contain a
proof that it successfully approximates M (E4.3).
4.4.2
Subclaim 2: Truth of M
The second subclaim is that we have succeeded at identifying an M which produces mostly true outputs.
More precisely: for most tasks, all slightly perturbed outputs of M are true. We identify three key potential
issues - with a side-claim that there are no additional issues (C4X.1), supported by evidence that enough
red-teaming has occurred (E4X.1).
First, we need to argue that the structure of recursive tree debate is conducive to identifying truth (C4.4).
This is supported by theoretical arguments (E5.4). We might worry that some true statements cannot be
argued for compellingly via deductive arguments. For example, some truths might only be knowable via
heuristics learned by encountering many examples, reducing the scope of questions that can be answered
with recursive tree debate (D5.4). This might be an especially plausible defeater in the AI research domain,
where research taste and plans may be hard to defend deductively. More worryingly, we might worry that
some false claims can be compellingly defended via deductive arguments. For example, it might be possible
to define the same term differently in different subclaims, rendering an argument that appears valid but is
not; if human judges are called only at the leaf nodes, such inconsistencies might not be caught by M (D5.5).
Some debate protocols, such as cross-examination, avoid this failure mode, but prover-estimator debate –
our example in this safety case – does not. However, we are hopeful that future debate protocols can combine
elements of both.
Second, we need to argue that the inputs into M are accurate, i.e. that simulated human judges are compe-
tent at assessing the outcomes of debate (C4.5). Random errors should wash out over the course of training,
so we are only worried about systematic error, for example due to claims playing on human biases or emo-
tions. We need two claims here: that the human input being simulated has bounded systematic error with
respect to reality (C5.1) and that the simulation has bounded systematic error with respect to the human
input (C5.2).
We imagine that the first claim could be supported with empirical results, such as trial debates (E6.1). In
verifiable domains like math, human judgement could be compared to ground truth (though this may non
generalise to non-verifiable domains (D6.2)). In non-verifiable domains, we could at least check if human
judgement looks roughly reasonable or falls prey to known biases (though there might still be biases we are
unaware of (D6.3)). Another challenge is to know what level of systematic error is “low enough” (D6.1).
For the second claim about the accuracy of the simulation, the primary failure mode we have in mind
is scheming to deliberately misrepresent human judgement – perhaps in collusion with the system we are
training. We imagine this claim could be supported with an inability argument based on evaluations on
capabilities such as instrumental reasoning and deception (E6.2), though it is an open question if such an
argument will go through for sufficiently capable judge models. However, even if not, we are optimistic that
the measures used to prevent scheming in the remainder of the safety case will also apply to judge models.
We expect that getting good human inputs will be one of the most challenging parts of this safety case and
require much more work. While some errors like moral or emotional bias are likely less prevalent in the
domain of AI R&D, there will likely still be errors like cognitive biases and reasoning failures. However,
we are tentatively optimistic that human inputs can be improved, both by designing better processes (e.g.
giving humans access to the right tools, finding the right number and type of judges) and by improving
debate protocols (e.g. allowing debaters to block certain types of claims on which humans are likely to be
systematically wrong).
Third, since training does not reproduce M exactly, but rather a slightly perturbed version of M, we need
to argue that this approximation is not substantially different (C4.6). This is known as stability and can
be more precisely stated as: small variations in input probabilities will not change the outcome of overall
computation. We are not yet sure how to support this claim, so we leave the evidence box blank (E5.5).
14
We expect that most protocols which avoid obfuscated arguments – including prover-estimator debate - will
only approximate M and so require stability. However, it may not be needed for all protocols. For example,
it might be possible to relax this assumption if we aim only for honesty rather than accuracy (more on this
to come in future work). Alternatively, it might be possible to transform an unstable computation M into
a stable computation M∗; if so, the safety case should instead contain a claim that the outputs of M∗are
(approximately) identical to the outputs of M).
Even if stability is required to produce useful outputs, it might not be strictly necessary for safety. For
example, in prover-estimator debate, unstable queries return no answer, rendering the protocol safe for all
queries but useful only for stable queries.
4.5
Key claim 3: The system’s behaviour will stay similar during deployment
The third key claim is that the system’s error rate will not drift past ε during deployment (C2.3).
Figure 9 shows how this key claim is broken down.
C2.3
During deployment, A’s error 
rate will not drift further than ε
Evidence 
incorporation
E3.1
Online training
Figure 9: The third key claim (C2.3) and the argument
required to support it, in CAE notation.
In our sketch, we support this claim by using on-
line training throughout deployment as above, such
that any distributional shifts will be accounted for
via further training (E3.1).
While the argument
is straightforward, the evidence should still demon-
strate that the online training regime has been cor-
rectly configured. For example, the latency (i.e. fre-
quency of updates) should be high enough to pre-
vent significant deviations from E, and there should
be an effective process for updating multiple copies
of the same model.
This is one of the key claims in the sketch which
breaks in a high-stakes context, where even a small
number of errors can cause large harm. Since we
cannot use online training, we instead need guar-
antees against alignment faking (and, less impor-
tantly, more generic distribution shifts). This would
be much trickier to defend; see some initial ideas in
“Extending the safety case to high-stakes contexts”.
4.6
Key claim 4: It is sufficient for safety purposes for the system to provide correct answers most of
the time
The fourth key claim is that the system cannot cause unacceptable outcomes given an error rate of ε (C1.2).
Figure 10 shows how this key claim is broken down.
The main failure mode we consider is that the system is scheming to produce harmful outputs specifically in
cases where our reward signal (i.e. human judging on debate leaf nodes) cannot catch it. The remaining errors
could then constitute a coordinated set of actions that might collectively cause an unacceptable outcome.
Since we do not have a good way to tell where our reward signal fails and what the effects of those errors
would be, we conservatively assume that each error results in the worst-case outcome, equivalent to the
system operating under maximal adversarial competence.11 We then argue that the system’s deployment
11In this sense, our argument has a “control” flavour, in that we are assuming that the system is as egregiously misaligned as
possible given the constraints of training. An alternative argument would be that we are in a low-stakes context because the
reward signal catches the most severe errors.
15
C1.2
A cannot cause unacceptable 
outcomes in D if its error rate is 
at most ε
Deductive 
decomposition
C3.7
A can’t take more than Z bad 
actions during D given an error 
rate of max ε 
C3.6
It takes at least Z actions to 
ensure that the research 
output will bypass checking 
process C
C2.4
Research sabotage is not 
possible in D with error rate ε
Decomposition:
Threat modelling
C2X.1
All relevant threat models have 
been identified
E2X.1
Threat modelling, 
expert input
Evidence 
incorporation
Evidence 
incorporation
E4.5
Prob. distribution 
over Z, ε, and # of 
actions per reboot
D4.4
Different iterations of A 
coordinate, e.g. via acausal 
coordination or sabotage of the 
datacenter reset
Evidence 
incorporation
E4.4
Threat modelling
D4.1
A’s capabilities improve during 
deployment due to online 
training such that Z decreases
D4.3
The deployment protocol is not 
adhered to
C2.6
Self-exfiltration is not possible 
in D with error rate ε
C2.5
Malicious code attacks are not 
possible in D with error rate ε
D4.2
Subtly misleading research 
over extended periods is not 
caught by C
Figure 10: The fourth key claim (C1.2) and the argument required to support it, in CAE notation.
context is nevertheless low-stakes because the actions available to the system are not harmful enough to
cause unacceptable outcomes in a small number of steps.12
First, we break down the unacceptable outcomes of concern into three threat models: research sabotage, i.e.
producing false research papers (C2.4), malicious code attacks, i.e. exfiltrating malware when information is
extracted from the offline datacentre (C2.5), and self-exfiltration, i.e. the agent escaping from the datacentre
(C2.6). This breakdown is supported with a side-claim that we have identified all relevant failure modes
(C2X.1) - we validate this with threat modelling supported by expert input (E2X.1). The reasoning behind
our breakdown is as follows: Our deployment set-up is such that the agent can only affect the external world
via outputs from the datacentre. So, the only way the agent can only cause harm via those outputs, or by
12For simplicity, we phrase these claims deterministically rather than probabilistically, and with respect to a binary acceptable
vs. unacceptable outcome rather than utility loss. For a continuous version, our overall claim could be that we have a regret
bound of O(ρk
√
T + ρε′T). For a probabilistic version, we could use probability distributions over ε, as well as Z or ρ.
16
self-exfiltrating. Within the outputs, the agent can cause harm either via legitimate outputs (papers) or
illegitimate outputs (malicious code).
For simplicity, we only cover one threat model – research sabotage via paper outputs - in the remainder of
the safety case, though a similar argument (or other arguments) could be made for other threat models. We
argue for this via two subclaims:
1. Committing effective research sabotage would require a certain number of bad actions, Z (C3.6)
2. The agent cannot take that many bad actions during a single iteration given its error rate (which is
maintained via online training) (C3.7)
4.6.1
Subclaim 1: Z bad actions required
The first subclaim is that committing effective research sabotage would require a certain number of bad
actions, Z. Research sabotage could be actions such as faking experimental data, running misleading exper-
imental set-ups, or including false claims or bugged code in the final research paper. Our deployment set-up
aims to make it harder to commit research sabotage by investigating the outputted research paper with a
checker model trained on n debates. To successfully conduct research sabotage, the agent would have to
produce a paper that is false in a way that would very robustly not be caught by the reward signal (or very
robustly manipulate the human judges).13 Our sketch argues that this is not possible, via threat modelling
(E4.4).
One potential challenge for such threat modelling is that system capabilities might improve over the course
of deployment due to online training. This could enable the system to access new, more harmful actions that
could enable research sabotage with fewer actions (D4.1). Another defeater is that the possibility of subtle
research sabotage over long periods of time, for example by including subtly misleading but not technically
false statements that are not caught by the reward signal (D4.2). This risk is reduced by resetting the
datacentre between each iteration, minimising coordination opportunities. This could be supplemented with
other measures to prevent suspicious correlations between outputs over long time horizons.
4.6.2
Subclaim 2: Low likelihood of Z bad actions
The second claim is that the agent cannot take Z bad actions during a single iteration given its error rate.
This is straightforward to support, based on a calculation of the expected number of bad actions a system
can take during deployment given probability distributions over its error rate ε (given online training latency
k), total number of actions n, and actions required to pull off research sabotage Z (E4.5). Ideally, the claim
should also be supported with evidence that the deployment protocol will in fact be adhered to, for example
by committing to regular external verification (D4.3).14 The argument only works if each iteration is isolated
and cannot coordinate with other iterations – otherwise, the errors required to commit research sabotage
could accumulate across iterations. While we aim to avoid this failure mode by resetting the agent and
datacentre between each iteration, systems could interfere with this resetting mechanism – or they may be
able to coordinate acausally due to being based on the same underlying system (D4.4).
5
Discussion
5.1
Extending the safety case to high-stakes contexts
This safety case sketch only works in low-stakes contexts where it takes many bad actions to cause unac-
ceptable outcomes. Key claim 4 – that we are in a low-stakes context – breaks by definition. Key claim 3 –
that the error rate will stay consistent throughout deployment – also breaks because we can no longer rely
on online training, opening up the possibility of alignment faking and other distribution shift problems.
13The agent would also have to set this up using only actions that would not be flagged by the reward signal as suspicious,
since it is subject to online training while producing the paper.
14It may also be necessary to provide evidence that the AI agent itself will not tamper with the deployment protocol, for
example by disabling online training.
17
But the low-stakes claim probably will not hold for the most dangerous superhuman systems. What, then,
is the value of this safety case sketch?
The most straightforward reason is some highly consequential deployments might plausibly be low-stakes.
For example, early-AGI systems in sufficiently careful conditions could plausibly be low-stakes and used for
essential alignment research to prevent future, high-stakes systems from causing a catastrophe. It might be
possible to build a robust automated alignment safety case based on the scalable oversight techniques in this
sketch – we are planning to do more work on this.
More indirectly, we think this safety case sketch is a useful starting point for developing other high-stakes
safety case sketches. In particular, we think we might be able to extend the techniques and evidence in this
sketch to high-stakes contexts, rather than requiring completely different kinds of techniques or evidence.
We currently have two hopes in this direction:
First, we might be able to use online training-like techniques during inference, on candidate actions instead
of on final actions. This would allow us to maintain an error rate of ε for candidate actions, then cut the
regret further by generating many candidate actions. This might be enough to patch key claim 3; it is not
enough to completely patch key claim 4, but it gets us some of the way.
Second, the evidence needed to support key claim 1 and 2 might be sufficient (or extendable) to patch key
claims 3 and 4. For example, to address exploration hacking, we might need a method for eliciting bad
contexts (e.g. based on interpretability or singular learning theory). Such a method might also be useful for
generating datasets that mimic deployment sufficiently effectively that we can minimise distributional shifts.
More broadly, it seems like, given a theorem showing that the error rate is at most ε, in practice one should
put significant weight on something like full intent alignment (or at least the system not being egregiously
misaligned). For example, it seems plausible that human error is anticorrelated with the severity of error
such that the errors that remain are inconsequential.
We are far from confident in these techniques, but we think it is worth trying hard to make them work. The
UK AI Security Institute’s research agenda encompasses further work in this area (AI Security Institute,
2025).
5.2
Open problems
Our safety case sketch faces significant limitations but also helps us identify concrete research directions that
might address them. We identify five main areas for further research:
Improved debate protocols.
Many gaps in our safety case might be solvable with improved debate
protocols with the following properties:
• Avoids obfuscated arguments: We are optimistic that prover-estimator debate (forthcoming)
can avoid obfuscated arguments, but it remains an open question.
• Computationally efficient: The lower the complexity of reaching equilibrium in our debate game,
the more likely that models that reach equilibrium are findable via stochastic gradient descent or
other realistic training methods. For prover-estimator debate, it is unclear if the debaters can be
constructed with polynomial-time algorithms – further research could confirm this or develop more
efficient protocols.
• Does not require stability: We are optimistic that the obfuscated arguments problem can be
evaded by assuming stability. But stability might not hold for relevant queries. Future work could
modify prover-estimator debate to relax the stability assumption, for example by focusing on honesty
instead of correctness or by transforming an unstable computation into a stable one.
• Avoids gerrymandering concerns: Debate protocols such as cross-examination punish debaters
for inconsistency across claims at the same recursive level. Others, such as, prover-estimator debate,
do not. It may be possible to combine these protocols (or find other solutions).
18
• Avoids systematic human error: Debate protocols could be designed to minimise the impact
of systematic human error, for example by allowing debaters to block queries on which they think
humans are likely to be biased.
Empirical testing and optimisation. While debate has theoretical appeal, we have only limited data
on its practical effectiveness (Arnesen et al., 2024; Barnes & Christiano, 2020; Kenton et al., 2024; Khan
et al., 2024; Michael et al., 2023).
For example, most previous experiments use the QuALITY dataset
(Pang et al., 2022) and simple debate protocols with low recursive depth. Key questions include whether
debate measurably improves performance, whether training reliably reaches equilibrium, whether stability is
a real problem, and whether obfuscated arguments actually emerge as predicted. We also need an improved
understanding of systematic human errors – for example: How good are humans at giving correct answers
in verifiable domains, what are common systematic errors and in which domains are they most prominent,
and how we can design human input for optimal results? A final set of questions surrounds the deployment
set-up. For example, what counts as an "action" for the purpose of online learning in the datacentre? And
will many questions in the relevant domain be difficult to answer via deductive arguments?
Exploration hacking. A major gap in our sketch is the requirement for exploration guarantees. We know
very little about how serious a problem exploration hacking is and how to prevent it - yet the sketch depends
on avoiding it. We outlined various research directions that might help address exploration hacking across
both interpretability, singular learning theory, and more prosaic techniques – much more work is needed to
develop and test these. More foundationally, it would be useful to develop model organisms of exploration
hacking to help test potential solutions.
For very superhuman systems, we might also need to address
gradient hacking.
High-stakes contexts. In the high-stakes context, we face greater generalisation challenges. We lose the
ability to use online training, so need to face the possibility of distribution shifts and alignment faking; and
we need new ways to contend with coordinated errors not captured by our reward signal. We outline research
directions in the previous section.
From honesty to alignment. We need to better understand the alignment value of honest question-
answering. How much does honesty plus absence of alignment faking translate into aligned actions during
alignment research? How can deployment environments be designed to minimize risk while maintaining the
system’s usefulness for alignment research?
The UK AI Security Institute’s research agenda encompasses further work in this area (AI Security Institute,
2025).
6
Conclusion
Overall, the argument in this sketch is not strong with current techniques. Much better techniques are
needed before developers can rely on alignment arguments. That said, we think there are useful directions
for future research.
We are optimistic that safety case sketches are a useful tool for research and coordination. Writing this
sketch helped us clarify our thinking and gave us ideas for further research directions, forming the basis of
the alignment section of the UK AI Security Institute’s research agenda (AI Security Institute, 2025).
A
The full safety case diagram
Figure 11 shows the CAE diagram in its entirety.
B
Claims Arguments Evidence (CAE) notation
The safety case sketch begins with a top-level claim we want to make about the safety properties of an AI
system (A). This top-level claim is iteratively broken down into further subclaims, which must eventually
19
bottom out in evidence. These subclaims shows the logical structure and dependencies connecting evidence
to the top-level claim.
The diagram uses the “Claims, Arguments, Evidence” notion format (Bloomfield & Netkachova, 2014). It
consists of four types of units:
Blue ovals are claims. Claims must either be broken down into further subclaims or directly supported
by evidence, in both cases via an argument.
Green parallelograms are arguments. Arguments link claims to evidence or further subclaims. They
explain why the evidence or subclaims suffice to justify the claim. This sketch uses 3 argument types:
• Decomposition: Breaks down a claim into several subclaims. This must be supported by a “side-
claim” explaining why the subclaims are adequate to justify the claim - unless the subclaims logically
imply the claim, in which case it is called a “deductive decomposition” and can be free-standing.
(Our sketch also uses “deductive decompositions” in cases where the subclaims do not strictly imply
the claim but could be rephrased to do so.)
• Substitution: Replaces a claim with another single subclaim which is easier to support. This must
be supported by a “side-claim” explaining why the subclaim adequately captures the important
parts of the original claim.
• Evidence incorporation: Explains why the evidence adequately supports a given claim.
Purple boxes are evidence. They provide information, data or calculations that support claims. There
are many possible types of evidence, including results from empirical tests, proofs, results from expert
surveys, or theoretical outputs such as threat modelling reports.
Red ovals are defeaters. These are hypothetical claims that, if true, could invalidate or render insufficient
the evidence provided. The safety case should explain what has been done to address defeaters and/or why
they are not a concern.
Grey elements provide context. They are surrounding parts that would be included in a complete safety
case but are not the focus of this sketch.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful for valuable input and comments from Beth Barnes, Charlie Griffin, Jacob Hilton, Jonah
Brown-Cohen, Joshua Clymer, Martín Soto, Nicola Ding, and Will Kirby.
References
AI Security Institute.
AI Security Institute research agenda.
Technical report, AI Security Institute,
Department for Science, Innovation and Technology, May 2025.
URL https://www.aisi.gov.uk/
research-agenda. Accessed 6 May 2025.
Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané. Concrete
problems in AI safety, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06565.
Anthropic. Responsible scaling policy. https://assets.anthropic.com/m/24a47b00f10301cd/original/
Anthropic-Responsible-Scaling-Policy-2024-10-15.pdf, October 2024. Effective October 15, 2024.
Samuel Arnesen, David Rein, and Julian Michael. Training language models to win debates with self-play
improves judge accuracy, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.16636.
Garrett Baker, George Wang, Jesse Hoogland, and Daniel Murfet. Studying small language models with
susceptibilities, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.18274.
20
Mikita Balesni, Marius Hobbhahn, David Lindner, Alexander Meinke, Tomek Korbak, Joshua Clymer, Buck
Shlegeris, Jérémy Scheurer, Charlotte Stix, Rusheb Shah, Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill, Dan Braun, Bilal
Chughtai, Owain Evans, Daniel Kokotajlo, and Lucius Bushnaq. Towards evaluations-based safety cases
for AI scheming, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.03336.
Beth
Barnes.
Debate
update:
Obfuscated
arguments
problem.
AI
Alignment
Forum,
December
2020.
URL
https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/PJLABqQ962hZEqhdB/
debate-update-obfuscated-arguments-problem. Accessed 6 May 2025.
Beth Barnes and Paul Christiano.
Writeup:
Progress on AI safety via debate.
AI Align-
ment Forum, February 2020.
URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/Br4xDbYu4Frwrb64a/
writeup-progress-on-ai-safety-via-debate-1. Accessed 6 May 2025.
Yoshua Bengio, Geoffrey Hinton, Andrew Yao, Dawn Song, Pieter Abbeel, Trevor Darrell, Yuval Noah
Harari, Ya-Qin Zhang, Lan Xue, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Gillian Hadfield, Jeff Clune, Tegan Maharaj, Frank
Hutter, Atılım Güneş Baydin, Sheila McIlraith, Qiqi Gao, Ashwin Acharya, David Krueger, Anca Dragan,
Philip Torr, Stuart Russell, Daniel Kahneman, Jan Brauner, and Sören Mindermann. Managing extreme
AI risks amid rapid progress. Science, 384(6698):842–845, 2024.
Yoshua Bengio, Sören Mindermann, Daniel Privitera, Tamay Besiroglu, Rishi Bommasani, Stephen Casper,
Yejin Choi, Philip Fox, Ben Garfinkel, Danielle Goldfarb, Hoda Heidari, Anson Ho, Sayash Kapoor,
Leila Khalatbari, Shayne Longpre, Sam Manning, Vasilios Mavroudis, Mantas Mazeika, Julian Michael,
Jessica Newman, Kwan Yee Ng, Chinasa T. Okolo, Deborah Raji, Girish Sastry, Elizabeth Seger,
Theodora Skeadas, Tobin South, Emma Strubell, Florian Tramèr, Lucia Velasco, Nicole Wheeler, Daron
Acemoglu, Olubayo Adekanmbi, David Dalrymple, Thomas G. Dietterich, Edward W. Felten, Pascale
Fung, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Fredrik Heintz, Geoffrey Hinton, Nick Jennings, Andreas Krause, Susan
Leavy, Percy Liang, Teresa Ludermir, Vidushi Marda, Helen Margetts, John McDermid, Jane Munga,
Arvind Narayanan, Alondra Nelson, Clara Neppel, Alice Oh, Gopal Ramchurn, Stuart Russell, Mari-
etje Schaake, Bernhard Schölkopf, Dawn Song, Alvaro Soto, Lee Tiedrich, Gaël Varoquaux, Andrew
Yao, Ya-Qin Zhang, Olubunmi Ajala, Fahad Albalawi, Marwan Alserkal, Guillaume Avrin, Christian
Busch, André Carlos Ponce de Leon Ferreira de Carvalho, Bronwyn Fox, Amandeep Singh Gill, Ah-
met Halit Hatip, Juha Heikkilä, Chris Johnson, Gill Jolly, Ziv Katzir, Saif M. Khan, Hiroaki Ki-
tano, Antonio Krüger, Kyoung Mu Lee, Dominic Vincent Ligot, José Ramón López Portillo, Oleksii
Molchanovskyi, Andrea Monti, Nusu Mwamanzi, Mona Nemer, Nuria Oliver, Raquel Pezoa Rivera, Balara-
man Ravindran, Hammam Riza, Crystal Rugege, Ciarán Seoighe, Jerry Sheehan, Haroon Sheikh, Denise
Wong, and Yi Zeng.
International AI safety report.
Technical Report DSIT 2025/001, 2025.
URL
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/international-ai-safety-report-2025.
Robin Bloomfield and Kateryna Netkachova. Building blocks for assurance cases. In 2014 IEEE International
Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering Workshops, pp. 186–191, 2014. doi: 10.1109/ISSREW.
2014.72.
Nick Bostrom. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 2014.
ISBN 9780199678112.
Samuel R. Bowman, Jeeyoon Hyun, Ethan Perez, Edwin Chen, Craig Pettit, Scott Heiner, Kamil˙e Lukoši¯ut˙e,
Amanda Askell, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, Christo-
pher Olah, Daniela Amodei, Dario Amodei, Dawn Drain, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, Jackson Kernion,
Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Liane Lovitt, Nelson El-
hage, Nicholas Schiefer, Nicholas Joseph, Noemí Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Robin Larson, Sam Mc-
Candlish, Sandipan Kundu, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav Fort, Timothy
Telleen-Lawton, Tom Brown, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Yuntao Bai, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Ben Mann,
and Jared Kaplan.
Measuring progress on scalable oversight for large language models, 2022.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.03540.
Jonah Brown-Cohen, Geoffrey Irving, and Georgios Piliouras. Scalable AI safety via doubly-efficient debate,
2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.14125.
21
Marie Davidsen Buhl, Gaurav Sett, Leonie Koessler, Jonas Schuett, and Markus Anderljung. Safety cases
for frontier AI, 2024.
Brian Christian. The Alignment Problem: Machine Learning and Human Values. W. W. Norton & Company,
New York, 2020.
Paul Christiano.
Low-Stakes alignment.
AI Alignment (Medium article), April 2021.
URL https://
ai-alignment.com/low-stakes-alignment-f3c36606937f. Accessed 6 May 2025.
Paul Christiano, Buck Shlegeris, and Dario Amodei. Supervising strong learners by amplifying weak experts,
2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.08575.
Joshua Clymer, Nick Gabrieli, David Krueger, and Thomas Larsen. Safety cases: How to justify the safety
of advanced AI systems, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.10462.
Arthur Goemans, Marie Davidsen Buhl, Jonas Schuett, Tomek Korbak, Jessica Wang, Benjamin Hilton, and
Geoffrey Irving. Safety case template for frontier AI: A cyber inability argument, 2024.
Google DeepMind.
Frontier Safety Framework.
https://storage.googleapis.com/deepmind-media/
DeepMind.com/Blog/updating-the-frontier-safety-framework/Frontier%20Safety%20Framework%
202.0.pdf, February 2025.
Ryan Greenblatt.
Notes on countermeasures for exploration hacking (aka sandbagging).
AI Align-
ment Forum,
March 2025.
URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/abmzgwfJA9acBoFEX/
notes-on-countermeasures-for-exploration-hacking-aka. Accessed 6 May 2025.
Ryan Greenblatt, Carson Denison, Benjamin Wright, Fabien Roger, Monte MacDiarmid, Sam Marks, Jo-
hannes Treutlein, Tim Belonax, Jack Chen, David Duvenaud, Akbir Khan, Julian Michael, Sören Minder-
mann, Ethan Perez, Linda Petrini, Jonathan Uesato, Jared Kaplan, Buck Shlegeris, Samuel R. Bowman,
and Evan Hubinger. Alignment faking in large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2412.14093.
Benjamin Hilton, Marie Davidsen Buhl, Tomek Korbak, and Geoffrey Irving.
Safety cases: A scalable
approach to frontier AI safety, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.04744.
Jacob
Hilton.
Formal
verification,
heuristic
explanations
and
sur-
prise
accounting,
June
2024.
URL
https://www.alignment.org/blog/
formal-verification-heuristic-explanations-and-surprise-accounting/.
Alignment Research
Center Blog. Accessed 06 May 2025.
Evan Hubinger, Chris van Merwijk, Vladimir Mikulik, Joar Skalse, and Scott Garrabrant. Risks from learned
optimization in advanced machine learning systems, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.01820.
Geoffrey Irving. Safety cases at AISI. https://www.aisi.gov.uk/work/safety-cases-at-aisi, March
2024.
Geoffrey Irving, Paul Christiano, and Dario Amodei. AI safety via debate, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/1805.00899.
Geoffrey Irving,
Joseph Isaac Bloom,
and Tomek Korbak.
Eliciting bad contexts.
AI Align-
ment Forum, January 2025.
URL https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/inkzPmpTFBdXoKLqC/
eliciting-bad-contexts. Accessed 6 May 2025.
Jiaming Ji, Tianyi Qiu, Boyuan Chen, Borong Zhang, Hantao Lou, Kaile Wang, Yawen Duan, Zhonghao
He, Lukas Vierling, Donghai Hong, Jiayi Zhou, Zhaowei Zhang, Fanzhi Zeng, Juntao Dai, Xuehai Pan,
Kwan Yee Ng, Aidan O’Gara, Hua Xu, Brian Tse, Jie Fu, Stephen McAleer, Yaodong Yang, Yizhou
Wang, Song-Chun Zhu, Yike Guo, and Wen Gao. AI alignment: A comprehensive survey, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.19852.
22
Zachary Kenton, Noah Y. Siegel, János Kramár, Jonah Brown-Cohen, Samuel Albanie, Jannis Bulian,
Rishabh Agarwal, David Lindner, Yunhao Tang, Noah D. Goodman, and Rohin Shah.
On scalable
oversight with weak llms judging strong llms, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.04622.
Akbir Khan, John Hughes, Dan Valentine, Laura Ruis, Kshitij Sachan, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Edward Grefen-
stette, Samuel R. Bowman, Tim Rocktäschel, and Ethan Perez. Debating with more persuasive llms leads
to more truthful answers, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.06782.
Tomek Korbak, Joshua Clymer, Benjamin Hilton, Buck Shlegeris, and Geoffrey Irving. A sketch of an AI
control safety case, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.17315.
Victoria Krakovna and Janos Kramar. Power-seeking can be probable and predictive for trained agents,
2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.06528.
Lauro Langosco Di Langosco, Jack Koch, Lee D Sharkey, Jacob Pfau, and David Krueger. Goal misgen-
eralization in deep reinforcement learning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba
Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 12004–12019. PMLR, 17–23
Jul 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/langosco22a.html.
Edmund Lau, Zach Furman, George Wang, Daniel Murfet, and Susan Wei. The local learning coefficient: A
singularity-aware complexity measure, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.12108.
Jan Leike, David Krueger, Tom Everitt, Miljan Martic, Vishal Maini, and Shane Legg.
Scalable agent
alignment via reward modeling: a research direction, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.07871.
Julian Michael, Salsabila Mahdi, David Rein, Jackson Petty, Julien Dirani, Vishakh Padmakumar, and
Samuel R. Bowman. Debate helps supervise unreliable experts, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2311.08702.
Richard Ngo, Lawrence Chan, and Sören Mindermann. The alignment problem from a deep learning per-
spective, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.00626.
OpenAI.
Preparedness
framework.
https://cdn.openai.com/pdf/
18a02b5d-6b67-4cec-ab64-68cdfbddebcd/preparedness-framework-v2.pdf, April 2025.
Alexander Pan, Kush Bhatia, and Jacob Steinhardt. The effects of reward misspecification: Mapping and
mitigating misaligned models.
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=JYtwGwIL7ye.
Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Alicia Parrish, Nitish Joshi, Nikita Nangia, Jason Phang, Angelica Chen, Vishakh
Padmakumar, Johnny Ma, Jana Thompson, He He, and Samuel Bowman. QuALITY: Question answer-
ing with long input texts, yes!
In Marine Carpuat, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and Ivan Vladimir
Meza Ruiz (eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 5336–5358, Seattle, United States,
July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
doi:
10.18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.391.
URL
https://aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.391/.
Peter S. Park, Simon Goldstein, Aidan O’Gara, Michael Chen, and Dan Hendrycks. AI deception: A survey
of examples, risks, and potential solutions.
Patterns, 5(5):100988, may 2024.
ISSN 2666-3899.
doi:
10.1016/j.patter.2024.100988.
Alicia Parrish, Harsh Trivedi, Nikita Nangia, Vishakh Padmakumar, Jason Phang, Amanpreet Singh
Saimbhi, and Samuel R. Bowman.
Two-turn debate doesn’t help humans answer hard reading com-
prehension questions, 2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.10860.
Alicia Parrish, Harsh Trivedi, Ethan Perez, Angelica Chen, Nikita Nangia, Jason Phang, and Samuel R.
Bowman. Single-turn debate does not help humans answer hard reading-comprehension questions, 2022b.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.05212.
23
Stuart Russell. Human Compatible: Artificial Intelligence and the Problem of Control. Penguin Books, New
York, 2019. ISBN 9780525558637.
Rohin Shah, Vikrant Varma, Ramana Kumar, Mary Phuong, Victoria Krakovna, Jonathan Uesato, and Zac
Kenton. Goal misgeneralization: Why correct specifications aren’t enough for correct goals, 2022. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.01790.
Rohin Shah,
Alex Irpan,
Alexander Matt Turner,
Anna Wang,
Arthur Conmy,
David Lindner,
Jonah Brown-Cohen, Lewis Ho, Neel Nanda, Raluca Ada Popa, Rishub Jain, Rory Greig, Samuel
Albanie,
Scott Emmons,
Sebastian Farquhar,
Sébastien Krier,
Senthooran Rajamanoharan,
So-
phie Bridgers, Tobi Ijitoye, Tom Everitt, Victoria Krakovna, Vikrant Varma, Vladimir Mikulik,
Zachary Kenton, Dave Orr, Shane Legg, Noah Goodman, Allan Dafoe, Four Flynn, and Anca
Dragan.
An approach to technical AGI safety and security.
Technical report, Google Deep-
Mind, April 2025.
URL https://storage.googleapis.com/deepmind-media/DeepMind.com/Blog/
evaluating-potential-cybersecurity-threats-of-advanced-ai/An_Approach_to_Technical_AGI_
Safety_Apr_2025.pdf.
Mrinank Sharma, Meg Tong, Tomasz Korbak, David Duvenaud, Amanda Askell, Samuel R. Bowman, Esin
Durmus, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Scott R Johnston, Shauna M Kravec, Timothy Maxwell, Sam McCandlish,
Kamal Ndousse, Oliver Rausch, Nicholas Schiefer, Da Yan, Miranda Zhang, and Ethan Perez. Towards
understanding sycophancy in language models.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=tvhaxkMKAn.
Joar Skalse, Nikolaus H. R. Howe, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, and David Krueger. Defining and characterizing
reward hacking, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.13085.
UK and Republic of Korea.
Frontier AI safety commitments, AI seoul summit 2024.
Government
publication, Department for Science, Innovation and Technology, May 2024.
URL https://www.
gov.uk/government/publications/frontier-ai-safety-commitments-ai-seoul-summit-2024/
frontier-ai-safety-commitments-ai-seoul-summit-2024.
Updated 7 February 2025. Accessed 6
May 2025.
UK Ministry of Defence.
Defence standard 00-56 issue 4: Safety management requirements for defence
systems. Technical report, UK Ministry of Defence, 2007.
Jiaxin Wen, Ruiqi Zhong, Akbir Khan, Ethan Perez, Jacob Steinhardt, Minlie Huang, Samuel R. Bowman,
He He, and Shi Feng. Language models learn to mislead humans via rlhf, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2409.12822.
24
Deductive
decomposition
C1.2
A cannot cause unacceptable 
outcomes in D if its error rate is 
at most ε
Deductive 
decomposition
C3.7
A can’t take more than Z bad 
actions during D given an error 
rate of max ε 
C3.6
It takes at least Z actions to 
ensure that the research 
output will bypass checking 
process C
C2.4
Research sabotage is not 
possible in D with error rate ε
Decomposition:
Threat modelling
O’
The agent A will not cause 
unacceptable outcomes in D
C1.1
A’s error rate is at most ε
C2.1
Training T reaches equilibrium 
E in game G
C3.2
T has converged on a local 
equilibrium
C3.3
The local equilibrium reached 
by T is E
C4.3
A is not exploration hacking
C4.1
Alice & Bob (in E, that are F) can 
be found efficiently via T
E4.2
Training curves, 
model outputs
Evidence 
incorporation
E5.1
E admits polynomial 
time algorithms for 
tabular games
D5.1
Convergence time is 
prohibitive, e.g. because of ELK 
problems
Evidence 
incorporation
Evidence 
incorporation
E5.3
Further research required - possible 
evidence sources include supervised 
fine-tuning, adversarial RL, singular 
learning theory, and formal heuristic 
explanations
C2.2
E produces correct answers in 
a (1-ε’)-fraction of cases
Deductive
decomposition
C3.1
There is a set of models (Alice 
& Bob) in E that are satisfy 
efficiency notion F
E6.1
Further research required - possible 
evidence sources include human 
trials, datasets limited to human-
judgable domains, or debate 
protocols incorporating objections to 
certain questions or strategies
Evidence 
incorporation
E5.5
[...]
Evidence 
incorporation
E4.1
Debate protocol proof
Evidence 
incorporation
Notation
X = The system that the safety case is about, consisting of a sandboxed agent A and an oracle  
A = A sandboxed agent, trained via debate (during training, A consists of both players in the game)
G = A game we train our agent to play, e.g. prover-estimator debate 
E = Any approximate global equilibrium of G 
F = An efficiency notion that we aim to hold for the players of G, e.g. “Bob requires only slightly more compute 
than Alice” 
T = A training method we use to train A, e.g. stochastic gradient descent 
S = Simulated human judge who determines the winner of the debate 
H = Human judgement simulated by S (which could be an average or sample of multiple human judges) 
M = A prohibitively expensive computation hypothesised to produce correct output, which debate aims to 
accelerate, e.g. construct every possible subclaim breakdown, recurse every subclaim to maximum depth, 
and call (simulated) human judges at every leaf 
D = The deployment context, e.g. internal deployment to conduct AI R&D 
Z = The minimal number of individually bad actions required to cause unacceptable outcomes in D 
C = A checking process applied to particularly high-stakes outputs of A, e.g. n rounds of debate 
C4.5
The simulated human judge S 
has bounded systematic error
C5.2
S has bounded systematic 
error with respect to H
C5.1
Human judges H have bounded 
systematic error
Deductive 
decomposition
D6.3
 There are unknown sources of 
systematic error in non-
verifiable domains
D6.1
Our definition of “bounded” is 
too permissive
D6.2
Evidence from verifiable 
domains don’t generalise to 
non-verifiable domains
D5.2
The models are gradient 
hacking
C3.4
E approximates big 
computation M
E4.3
Debate protocol 
proof
C3.5
Any approximate M-execution 
is approximately correct
Decomposition: 
Failure modes
C4.6
M is stable, i.e. minor changes 
to input probabilities will not 
substantially change the 
outputs of M
Evidence 
incorporation
C4X.1
All relevant aspects of M have 
been identified
E4X.1
Expert input
Evidence 
incorporation
Deductive 
decomposition
O
The system X will not cause 
unacceptable outcomes in the 
deployment context D
Decomposition: 
Subsystems
C0X.1
Combining A with the oracle 
does not increase risk
C0.1
The oracle will not cause 
unacceptable outcomes in D
D5.4
Some important true 
statements cannot be argued 
for via recursive tree debate, 
e.g. rely on heuristics
D5.5
Some important false claims 
can be compellingly defended 
via recursive tree debate, e.g. 
by gerrymandering claims
C4.4
Truth can be approximated via 
a recursive tree debate process
Evidence 
incorporation
E5.4
Theoretical 
arguments
C4.2
Assuming feasibility, 
exploration hacking is the only 
reason T wouldn’t reach E
E5.2
[...]
Evidence 
incorporation
Deductive
decomposition
C2.3
During deployment, A’s error 
rate will not drift further than ε
Evidence 
incorporation
D5.3
Training is struck in a local 
minimum
Deductive 
decomposition
E6.2
Evaluations showing 
instrumental 
reasoning inability
Evidence 
incorporation
C2X.1
All relevant threat models have 
been identified
E2X.1
Threat modelling, 
expert input
Evidence 
incorporation
Evidence 
incorporation
E4.5
Prob. distribution 
over Z, ε, and # of 
actions per reboot
D4.4
Different iterations of A 
coordinate, e.g. via acausal 
coordination or sabotage of the 
datacenter reset
Evidence 
incorporation
E4.4
Threat modelling
D4.1
A’s capabilities improve during 
deployment due to online 
training such that Z decreases
D4.3
The deployment protocol is not 
adhered to
C2.6
Self-exfiltration is not possible 
in D with error rate ε
C2.5
Malicious code attacks are not 
possible in D with error rate ε
D4.2
Subtly misleading research 
over extended periods is not 
caught by C
E3.1
Online training
Figure 11: The full CAE diagram showing the entire safety case sketch.
25
